Open in app
Sidebar menu
Search
Write
Notifications

your-mommas-favorite
Generative AI
Member-only story

I Built a Wall Street Analyst in 200 Lines of Code — And It Outperformed My $2,000/Month Bloomberg Terminal
How an open-source AI agent named Dexter is democratizing financial research, one autonomous query at a time
Adham Khaled
Adham Khaled

Follow
7 min read
·
Oct 20, 2025
731


17





The cursor blinked mockingly at me.

It was 2 AM, and I’d been staring at Apple’s quarterly financials for three hours, trying to calculate their revenue growth trajectory across four quarters. My eyes burned from switching between Excel spreadsheets, SEC filings, and financial databases.​

There has to be a better way, I thought.

That’s when I found Dexter.

Not a person. Not another expensive SaaS tool promising “AI-powered insights” for $299/month. But something different entirely: an autonomous financial research agent built in approximately 200 lines of code that thinks, plans, and validates its own work.​

Think Claude Code, but for finance. And it’s completely open-source.​

Press enter or click to view image in full size

The Problem Every Investor Faces
Here’s the brutal truth about financial research: it’s fragmented, time-consuming, and expensive.​

Want to compare Microsoft and Google’s operating margins? You’ll need to:

Pull income statements from two different sources
Normalize the data (because companies report differently)
Build calculations in Excel
Cross-reference with balance sheets
Validate your math
Write up your findings
Repeat this for every stock you research. Every quarter.​

Professional analysts have Bloomberg terminals ($24,000/year) and teams of researchers. Individual investors have… Google and hope.​

Until now.

Enter Dexter: The AI That Thinks Like an Analyst
Dexter isn’t just another financial data API wrapper. It’s an autonomous multi-agent system that genuinely reasons through financial problems.​

Here’s what happened when I asked it a complex question:

“What was Tesla’s free cash flow trend over the last 4 quarters, and how does it compare to their capital expenditure growth?”

Most tools would give me raw numbers. Dexter did something remarkable.​

First, it broke down my question into discrete research tasks (planning).​

Then, it autonomously fetched Tesla’s cash flow statements across multiple quarters.​

Next, it calculated the trends, performed comparative analysis, and validated its own work.​

Finally, it synthesized everything into a comprehensive answer, complete with context about what the numbers actually mean.​

Total time: 47 seconds.

The Architecture That Changes Everything
What makes Dexter special isn’t just what it does — it’s how it thinks.​

The system orchestrates four specialized AI agents, each with a distinct role :​

The Planning Agent acts like your research director. Give it a vague question like “Is Amazon financially healthy?” and it decomposes this into specific, answerable tasks: analyze debt ratios, examine cash flow trends, review revenue growth, assess profitability metrics.​

The Action Agent is your tireless analyst. It selects the right tools from its arsenal and executes each research step, interfacing with financial databases that contain 30+ years of data for 16,000+ tickers.​

The Validation Agent serves as your fact-checker. After each task completes, it verifies the data is sufficient and accurate before moving forward — no hallucinations, no guesswork.​

The Answer Agent becomes your storyteller. It takes all the raw research and weaves it into clear, actionable insights that actually answer your original question.​

This isn’t prompt engineering magic. It’s a genuinely novel approach to autonomous research.​

Getting Started: Simpler Than You Think
I’m not a finance expert. I’m an embedded systems engineer who writes about AI tools.​

If I can get Dexter running, anyone can.​

The Setup (5 Minutes, Seriously)

The beauty of Dexter is its simplicity. You need three things: Python 3.10 or higher, an OpenAI API key, and a Financial Datasets API key.​

First, clone the repository to your local machine:

git clone https://github.com/virattt/dexter.git
cd dexter
Install dependencies using the uv package manager (it handles everything automatically):

uv sync
Configure your environment by copying the example file and adding your API keys:

cp env.example .env
# Edit .env with your OPENAI_API_KEY and FINANCIAL_DATASETS_API_KEY
Launch Dexter:

uv run dexter-agent
That’s it. No Docker containers, no complex configurations, no database setup.​

The Financial Datasets Piece
Here’s the only catch: Dexter needs quality financial data to work its magic.​

The Financial Datasets API provides access to comprehensive stock market data — income statements, balance sheets, cash flows for 16,000+ tickers spanning three decades. It’s what turns Dexter from a clever chatbot into a genuine research tool.​

You’ll need to sign up at financialdatasets.ai and choose a plan (they offer both subscriptions and pay-as-you-go credits). Once you have your API key, add it to your .env file and you're ready to research.​

Think of it as paying for Bloomberg-quality data at a fraction of the cost.​

Real Questions, Real Answers
The moment Dexter clicked for me was when I tested it against my own analysis.​

I’d spent an afternoon researching NVIDIA’s revenue growth patterns. When I asked Dexter the same question, it returned an answer that matched my findings — but included context I’d missed about seasonality and segment breakdowns.​

Try these queries to see what it can do :​

“Compare Microsoft and Google’s operating margins for 2023”

Dexter will pull both companies’ income statements, calculate operating margins, provide the comparison, and add context about which business segments drive the differences.​

“What is Amazon’s debt-to-equity ratio based on recent financials?”

It fetches the latest balance sheet, performs the calculation, and explains whether the ratio indicates healthy leverage or potential risk.​

“Analyze Tesla’s cash flow trends over the past year”

You’ll get quarterly cash flow data, trend analysis, and insights about whether the company is generating or burning cash — critical information for investors.​

What Makes This Different
I’ve tested FinRobot, FinAgent, and other AI financial tools.​

Dexter wins on three fronts :​

Radical simplicity — The entire codebase is roughly 200 lines. You can actually read and understand how it works. Most frameworks require a PhD to configure.​

True autonomy — Dexter doesn’t just retrieve data; it plans multi-step research workflows without human intervention. Ask a complex question, and watch it break the problem down, gather evidence, validate findings, and synthesize conclusions.​

Transparent reasoning — The multi-agent architecture lets you see exactly how it reached its conclusions. No black box magic, no “trust us” moments.​

The Code That Powers It All
For the developers in the room, here’s what impressed me most :​

The project structure is beautifully organized:

dexter/
├── agent.py       # Main orchestration
├── model.py       # LLM interface  
├── tools.py       # Financial data tools
├── prompts.py     # Agent system prompts
├── schemas.py     # Data validation
└── cli.py         # Command line interface
Each component has a single, clear responsibility. The agent orchestration logic uses LangChain for managing LLM interactions, while Pydantic models ensure data validation and type safety.​

You can configure safety limits to prevent runaway execution:

agent = Agent(
    max_steps=20,              # Global limit
    max_steps_per_task=5       # Per-task limit
)
This is production-grade code written for humans to understand.​

The Growing Movement
Since its release on October 13, 2025, Dexter has accumulated over 1,300 GitHub stars and 147 forks.​

The community is already extending it — adding new data sources, building visualization capabilities, creating sector-specific analysis modules.​

One contributor built a portfolio tracking extension. Another added cryptocurrency support. A third created automated report generation.​

This is what happens when you build something genuinely useful and make it open-source.​

Where This Goes Next
The implications extend beyond individual investors.​

Financial analysts could use Dexter as a first-pass research tool, automating the data gathering while they focus on interpretation. Students learning financial analysis get hands-on experience with real data and AI systems. Researchers studying market trends can process datasets at scale.​

The codebase is MIT licensed — meaning you can fork it, modify it, build commercial applications on top of it.​

Want to add news sentiment analysis? Build it. Need integration with your brokerage API? Add it. Require sector-specific metrics? Extend it.​

The Bigger Picture
We’re witnessing something significant: the democratization of sophisticated financial analysis.​

Tools that cost tens of thousands annually are being replicated — and in some cases, surpassed — by open-source AI agents anyone can run.​

Dexter won’t replace Bloomberg terminals for institutional investors. But for individual investors, students, analysts at smaller firms, and anyone who needs financial insights without enterprise budgets? This changes the game.​

The best part? You can inspect every line of code. You know exactly what it’s doing, how it’s doing it, and why.​

Try It Yourself
The repository is live at GitHub — virattt/dexter: An autonomous agent for deep financial research

The setup takes five minutes. The first query you run will feel like magic.​

Start with a simple question about a company you’re researching. Watch Dexter break it down, gather data, validate its work, and deliver insights.​

Then try something more complex. Push the boundaries. See where it excels and where it needs improvement.​

And if you build something interesting on top of it? The community would love to see it.​

The future of financial research isn’t locked behind expensive paywalls. It’s open-source, autonomous, and written in 200 lines of code that anyone can read.


This story is published on Generative AI. Connect with us on LinkedIn and follow Zeniteq to stay in the loop with the latest AI stories.

Subscribe to our newsletter and YouTube channel to stay updated with the latest news and updates on generative AI. Let’s shape the future of AI together!


Finance
Business
Artificial Intelligence
Stock Market
Software Development
731


17




Generative AI
Published in Generative AI
78K followers
·
Last published Dec 27, 2025
Stay updated with the latest news, research, and developments in the world of generative AI. We cover everything from AI model updates, comprehensive tutorials, and real-world applications to the broader impact of AI on society. Work with us: jimclydegm@gmail.com


Follow
Adham Khaled
Written by Adham Khaled
10.6K followers
·
111 following
4x Boosted Writer || Embedded Systems Engineer but got obsessed with AI


Follow
Responses (17)
your-mommas-favorite
your-mommas-favorite
﻿

Cancel
Respond
Andrei Sokolov
Andrei Sokolov

Nov 12, 2025


Yet another click bait article.
115

Reply

Jschaab
Jschaab

Nov 14, 2025


You’ll need to sign up at financialdatasets.ai and choose a plan (they offer both subscriptions and pay-as-you-go credits). Cost=2400 year , not free
102


1 reply

Reply

John Pirisino
John Pirisino

Nov 15, 2025


I asked Dexter and Copilot this question – Should I invest in Oracle. One said Yes and one said No. Interesting?!?
Their answers are below.
Dexter's
Based on current financial data, Oracle (ORCL) appears to be a mature,
profitable company but is trading…more
38


2 replies

Reply

See all responses
More from Adham Khaled and Generative AI
I Read OpenAI’s GPT‑5.2 Prompting Guide So You Don’t Have To
Towards AI
In

Towards AI

by

Adham Khaled

I Read OpenAI’s GPT‑5.2 Prompting Guide So You Don’t Have To
(And I turned it into copy/paste templates you can use today.)​

Dec 14, 2025
1.2K
19


The Best MCP Servers For Presentations
Generative AI
In

Generative AI

by

Jim Clyde Monge

The Best MCP Servers For Presentations
AI agents can now create native PowerPoint and Google Slides presentations with MCP Servers.

Dec 7, 2025
428
8


AI Can Do More Than You Think — The Most Practical Ways to Use AI Every Day
Generative AI
In

Generative AI

by

Nitin Sharma

AI Can Do More Than You Think — The Most Practical Ways to Use AI Every Day
Here, I’m going to share the most practical, real-world ways you can use AI right now, not the generic ones.

Dec 16, 2025
344
11


The “Unzip” That Backdoors Your PC: Why Your Old WinRAR Is Now a National Security Risk
Readers Club
In

Readers Club

by

Adham Khaled

The “Unzip” That Backdoors Your PC: Why Your Old WinRAR Is Now a National Security Risk
We ignored the “Please Buy License” pop-up for 20 years. Now, the silence is costing us everything.

Dec 18, 2025
666
16


See all from Adham Khaled
See all from Generative AI
Recommended from Medium
How to Read One Book Per Week (Even if You Read Slowly)
Scott H. Young
Scott H. Young

How to Read One Book Per Week (Even if You Read Slowly)
Become the person who can easily ready 50+ books in a year

Dec 10, 2025
6.7K
232


tech layoffs 2025 | most in-demand tech skills 2025 | tech jobs future after AI | skills that won’t be replaced by AI
Write A Catalyst
In

Write A Catalyst

by

Crafting-Code

Over 126,000 Tech Jobs Gone in 2025 — Here’s Exactly Which Skills Are Now Untouchable
Backed by layoffs.fyi data: The 7 roles exploding while others vanish

Dec 25, 2025
2.4K
49


I Thought I Knew System Design Until I Met a Google L7 Interviewer
Beyond Localhost
In

Beyond Localhost

by

The Speedcraft Lab

I Thought I Knew System Design Until I Met a Google L7 Interviewer
A single whiteboard question revealed the gap between knowing patterns and actually designing systems that scale.

Dec 22, 2025
3.6K
74


Why the Kalman Filter Beats Moving Averages in Trading
Coding Nexus
In

Coding Nexus

by

Emma Kirsten

Why the Kalman Filter Beats Moving Averages in Trading
How an old aerospace algorithm cuts through market noise better than SMAs and EMAs ever could

Dec 18, 2025
974
14


The Best AI Tools for 2026
Artificial Corner
In

Artificial Corner

by

The PyCoach

The Best AI Tools for 2026
If you’re going to learn a new AI tool, make sure it’s one of these

Dec 1, 2025
3.3K
161


Apple Just Fired the Designer Who Made iOS 26 Unreadable. Here’s What Truly Happened.
Mac O’Clock
In

Mac O’Clock

by

Nov Tech

Apple Just Fired the Designer Who Made iOS 26 Unreadable. Here’s What Truly Happened.
Now he’s going to Meta, Stephen Lemay is taking over, and Apple employees are publicly celebrating. Here’s the full story.

Dec 22, 2025
4K
151


See more recommendations